James Koproski
Prof. Szymkiewicz
ENG 100-05 College Writing
22 October 2024
Electric Vehicles and the Environment
Introduction/Abstract
	The moment electric vehicles (EVs) became mainstream, people have debated whether or not they were better for the environment than traditional combustion vehicles (CVs). It is common for people with this belief to say that EVs are greener because they have no emissions when being driven while the other side claims that the manufacturing and recycling costs offset this benefit. Previous studies of this debate usually exclude several factors that go into the total greenhouse gas emission over the course of the vehicle’s life. Some of these factors drastically affect the results of these tests and may have been left out on purpose or by accident, with the authors unaware of their effect. Few papers address the entire lifecycle of the vehicles in question as well as research both opinions. Because of this research, it is very hard to determine which type of vehicle is, on average, better for the environment. This paper will address this problem, including data from the vehicle’s whole life as well as research supporting both sides of the argument to give readers the ability to form their own opinions based on facts about both EVs and CVs. Research for this paper has shown that in general, smaller electric vehicles such as economy cars and small sedans are typically more environmentally friendly than their gas powered counterparts, but larger trucks are far more efficient and cleaner when using combustion engines. This question will be developed and answered along the way starting with the production costs of making each vehicle, maintenance and fuel costs, and with emissions produced when recycling the vehicles, finally ending with the refined question and answer.

Raw Material Extraction
	Before emissions from operation can be considered, the costs of building the vehicles must be considered. This starts with the processing of raw materials, which often requires large amounts of water and energy and can release large amounts of emissions into the air and water. The bodies of the cars are mostly made from metals like aluminum and steel, which have production methods that have been thoroughly refined throughout history and are mostly safe and emit few greenhouse gases. Since the materials required for the bodies of the cars are mostly the same, the difference in manufacturing emissions lies with the lithium batteries and combustion engines. Gas powered engines mostly require the same metals as the car body, adding very little to the emissions produced. Lithium batteries, however, require several rare earth metals to be mined such as cobalt, graphite, and lithium. Neither of these three elements are easily mined and processed, leading to a plethora of environmental concerns. Because of this, studies have been conducted on the environmental and human effects of this mining. According to Lattanzio, “Mining activities in the DRC have been linked with elevated human exposure to cobalt and other metals” (Lattanzio 12). This exposure can cause skin and lung conditions and permanently alter DNA of people and animals. When graphite is mined and transported, heavy metals embedded in it can leak into the soil, causing up to a 40% decrease in crop yields from affected areas (Brown). According to Brown, “In traditional lithium mining, salt-rich brine is pumped from deep in the earth to the surface, forming man-made lakes that are then allowed to evaporate” (Brown 6). This causes problems because 2016, in Tibet, toxic chemicals from lithium mining made their way into the Liqi River and destroyed the local water supply, killed almost all fish, and poisoned livestock for people in the settlements around the river. 
	The extraction of raw materials is one of the biggest arguments against EV production. Many people say that the environmental cost of this mining cancels out the lack of emissions of the vehicle while in use. To add to the complicated nature of this debate, it is very difficult to put these environmental problems into numbers to get a clear answer, which leaves the answer up for interpretation. Everyone will see these environmental impacts with a different severity, leading to some people claiming that this alone makes CVs better overall while others see this as a tradeoff required for the vehicles to produce zero greenhouse gases while in operation. I personally feel like the poisoning of both people and natural resources is hard to overlook. To make matters worse, the people that suffer the effects are not the ones doing the mining, so they had no say in whether or not this was allowed to happen. Because of this, when it comes to raw material extraction, combustion vehicles are better for the environment in this case.

Manufacturing
	Once the raw materials are extracted, They need to be assembled into the final vehicles. Because EVs and CVs are very similar on the outside, the manufacturing cost of the car bodies and auxiliary systems create roughly the same amount of greenhouse gases. However, the production of EV battery packs accounts for 70-75% of total production emissions, which are not a factor in CV production (Lattanzio). This leads to EV production emissions being estimated at 1.3-2 times higher than CVs of similar size. To make matters worse, the concentrations of the more harmful gases are 1.5-2.5 times higher in the production of an EV battery. This is because of how difficult it is to build a large, high capacity battery for this use case. First, a battery cell must be made using sheets of rare earth metals, which of course, need to be processed and refined before they can be in a workable state. Once a cell is made, it is then assembled with thousands of others, 7,140 cells weighing 1,836 pounds in the case of the Tesla Model S. This overall process takes a lot of time and energy even for precise machines, leading to the drastic difference in production emissions. In addition to this, the larger the vehicle, the bigger the battery has to be. For electric pickup trucks, the battery can weigh closer to 3,000 pounds, which is close to the weight of a small CV entirely (Gustafsson).
	However, at this point, the answer to the question of which type of vehicle is more environmentally friendly starts to blur. While it is still quite clear that EVs create more emissions before they even reach an owner, this is almost to be expected. The difference in technologies means that creating an EV uses far newer and less refined methods than CV manufacturing, which has had over a century to perfect. But this gap in production emissions changes based on the type of vehicle. Small economy cars require far less material to create batteries, leading to only a slight upper hand on the part of the CV. But with larger vehicles, the gap begins to grow exponentially. A truck will need a naturally larger battery, and since batteries are very heavy, the battery needs to be even bigger to account for its own weight, leading to the larger gap (Lattanzio). This is why there have not been any commercially successful electric semi trucks as of 2024. At this stage, all EVs produce more greenhouse gases than CVs, but that changes once the vehicle gets sold and starts being used. 



The In-Use Phase
The in-use phase of a vehicle is where that majority of emissions are produced whether it is electric or not. CVs will always need refueling and for the average person, most likely happens at a constant rate that can be represented as a simple line that increases over time at a rate based on how often the vehicle is driven. This line, however, increases very rapidly since the average passenger car emits 4.6-4.7 metric tons of CO2 alone in one year. EVs are a similar way except the emissions come from how the electricity is generated rather than the vehicle itself. This makes the question much harder to pinpoint, which Gustafsson and Svensson capture perfectly in their paper. The basis of their research was to compare the emissions produced from charging EVs in 11 countries across Europe. After conducting experiments and creating graphs of their findings, they discuss their results, “The electric vehicle applications have lower climate change impact than the diesel alternatives, except for the 40-ton truck in a Dutch electricity production system (Gustafsson 9).” According to Figure 5 in their research, in Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom, electric trucks have a worse climate change impact than diesel variants. This highlights the major concern of current EV charging infrastructure. Because electricity is not produced 100% free of emissions, the charging of an EV is not considered to be zero emissions. In the four countries mentioned, it is more efficient to just use fuel in a CV rather than using it to generate electricity for EVs. This is then compounded by the larger trucks and larger batteries mentioned in the previous section (Gustafsson). When it comes to passenger cars, however, only the Netherlands retains this fact. Singh’s article uses visuals to explain this in a clear and concise way. When comparing the relative emissions of a Nissan Leaf, Chevrolet Bolt, and Tesla Model S to a Toyota Prius hybrid, it is proven that in almost all parts of the country, the Leaf has a lower climate change impact than the Prius, the Bolt has slightly lower, and the full-size Model S has a worse impact. 
	Again, the in-use phase of the vehicle’s life makes the question even harder to answer as when compared to hybrids, smaller EVs are cleaner, but full-size electric sedans are worse for the environment. Because of this, I believe that the majority of EVs, being sedans and SUVs, are possibly worse for the environment than CVs depending on where the electricity for charging is sourced. Again, adding another level of complexity to the question. To give a solid answer, smaller EVs are always cleaner than equivalently sized CVs. Then as the vehicle size increases, the balance shifts in favor of CVs where electric semi trucks are significantly worse than their combustion equivalents.

Recycling
Once any vehicle has reached a point where repairs do not make sense, it is sent to a junkyard to be recycled. Apart from batteries, all cars are made of mostly easily recyclable metals, plastics, and fabrics. These simply get separated and shipped off to be reshaped or melted down to be used again. But again, the deciding factor is the batteries. According to Lattanzio, “The rate of lead-acid battery recycling was approximately 99%, making them one of the most recycled products in the United States.” “Reports estimate recycling rates for lithium-ion batteries to be less than 5% in the United States (Lattanzio 25).” Because of this difference in recycling rates, most EV battery packs end up in landfills. Going back to the raw material phase, if these batteries sit and decompose in a landfill, the rare earth metals will seep into the soil and cause the same problems that mining them does. While this does not emit any greenhouse gases, the environmental impact should still be considered when answering the question. 
Conclusion and Answer
	Now that the entire lifecycle of both EVs and CVs has been analyzed, the question of whether or not EVs are better for the environment can be answered. Based on the research and data provided, smaller electric passenger cars are generally cleaner then their gas powered equivalents with the source of electricity having negligible effect. When it comes to small trucks, the answer depends on how cleanly the electricity to charge is sourced. If the electricity comes purely from fossil fuels, then CVs are better in this case, but if not, EVs are. Then for anything bus-sized or larger, CVs are cleaner unless the electricity for EVs is sourced entirely clean from sources like wind or solar. The concept of EVs are also far newer, meaning that the infrastructure is less developed. Countries like the United States have also confirmed that they are working to create a cleaner electric grid, which will give the advantage to EVs (Singh). To put it simply, I believe that EVs have potential to be the overall most efficient vehicle, but the technology behind them is still too young to provide significant competition in all vehicle markets as of 2024.
